My name is Soledad, but everyone calls me Sol.
I consider myself a very hardworking woman, who has struggled since I was little.
All my life has been about farming, it has been tobacco.
It's like in that field I have always been working, working, and working.
What does it mean to fix the land?
It is dug into furrows and then the seedlings are brought.
When it's small, it is fixed almost every day.
And around 45 days, the first leaves that we call "bajera" are removed.
In the past, men and women used to work the same way we do now, but the one who had the money, the one who decided what to do, was the man.
Now it's very different, one also has their own harvest independent of what they work on.
And around 45 days, the first leaves that we call "bajera" are removed.
At home, when I was single, I was the one my sisters always told...
You go, you're the tough one, go and ask Dad for permission to go out.
Until the moment I had a partner.
When I moved in with the father of my children, because I live with my boyfriend now,
I had that mentality or how we were raised that
you had to endure infidelity, drunkenness.
There were times when he didn't even come home.
Until a point came where the relationship couldn't go on and he left.
He accused me, lived with the kids there, my god, to move forward with both of them.
To push forward and work, come home and stay up all night, and wake up like that.
Did you ever go to school or not?
No, I didn't. I had to see my daughter there and when...
Earlier, when they sent us to study or not, they didn't let us study.
Nothing, because my mom doesn't know anything.
And my mom did go to school, she finished high school in Curití, but after she got married, that was it...
And she left?
That was the end of her education.
They kept going with dad's favorite, with my mom, with my mom, with my mom, with my mom, with my mom, with my mom.
Well, in fact, you know the whole story of what I went through with the father of my children.
That case, well, it had just happened to you, and before that, there was something that happened every day.
You were expecting.
Lo que eso lo hizo fue conendo e ir admitting eso.
Well, Nettie knows very well the whole story of what I went through with the father of my children.
That change was for the better.
Did she see it a lot then?
Yes, completely.
He didn't agree with me joining the council because he knew that once I was on the council,
I would have the power to be more independent,
and I wouldn't depend on him financially anymore.
Wasn't he afraid of this change, Nettie?
Well, yes, and it was difficult.
Food, everything.
And well, at first, I didn't think I was capable.
And that's when I also set my mind to it, to have my own house.
Alright, Nettie. Let's go inside.
Sometimes I think, I don't know what happened to me or why I reached the point where I did whatever he said.
At that time, I was very submissive,
but when the relationship ended, I returned to being the girl I was before.
Little by little, the wound healed until the day came when I didn't care anymore.
Thank God it was something I was able to overcome.
My love, women should be respected first.
Women are not objects to have the woman in the house
to wash for me, to iron for me, and to cook for me.
So let them know, they are going to play.
Goodbye.
Goodbye, solitude.
For me, home is where there is companionship, where love is.
It's like the reason to get up in the morning.
Despite all the difficulties, life is very beautiful,
but there are still many challenges.
Sometimes you feel sick or say, no, I can't take it anymore, I'm tired.
Son, hello, son.
Let's go, get up.
I want to study.
Okay.
Let's go.
As parents, we want to give the best to our children, so they don't lack anything.
Also, having my own house is one of my dreams.
Alright, my house is just as I dreamed it, I finished it.
That motivates me to work, to work and have my own things.
Hello, doctor, good morning.
Doctor, the thing is, here at the Morros school, well, I know that
it's the responsibility of the planning engineer, but I don't have his number either.
This, they're asking me for the collaboration of some parents to do a work shift.
Um, they're asking for the collaboration of some parents to do a work shift.
of work.
I love politics.
And yes, even before becoming a councilwoman, I had already been nominated as a councilwoman.
Soledad is running because Soledad talks a lot with people, Soledad collaborates.
And when I ran for the council, well, thank God I was able to win, and now I'm on the council.
What are the possibilities of being able to bring water from the river?
The river is not far away.
They could propose a project to extract water from the river and bring it to the streets
so that they can work.
That is a long-term project.
Still, we cannot say that we will have it next year because that would be lying to them.
The problem is also that not everyone agrees on that.
There are some requests that cannot be fulfilled, like through the air.
Permission must be requested for the location of the tanks, from the landowner.
I promise you that when I become mayor...
Because people will eat it.
When I have your vote, when I become mayor, I will offer them the Minister of Water.
That's how it is already in tanks.
I don't know why Jordán was so forgotten.
They say it was previous administrations.
No, no, Jordán doesn't progress because a father cursed it.
Even the father doesn't like it when they say that Jordán was cursed.
They say, no, Jordán is not cursed.
Jordán is lacking someone who is cursed.
Jordán is not cursed, what Jordán lacks is determination to overcome it.
We are in the excavation shift, yes.
They are removing everything.
They are also removing what's inside the school.
Yes.
I am the only woman, and I think I'm the one who speaks the most in the council.
Regarding the water issue, my opinion is that there should be more investment in that.
Well, we know that we depend on tobacco, that the community in general works with tobacco.
So it's very important that this project can be carried out
and provide support to the people so they can move forward.
So it's something great and really necessary here in Jordán.
I would like to have more power to be able to make decisions,
to be able to do something for the town.
Thank you.
We appreciate the municipal administration, each of the offices,
each of its employees who have been providing their services with the organization in a very special way.
Let's go!
Juan Pablo has been saying it since we were kids, we were even together.
The relationship became official when I ran for council.
We will even celebrate three years together with him, three years of being together.
But my relationship with Pablo has been very beautiful.
Pablo and I are together, but for me, I am a single mother
because I am the one who is supporting my children.
For example, the house was my responsibility, and if I lay a brick,
I will do it with my own work.
Hello! Hello Eduardo!
How are you?
15:23.280
Hello!
Hello Eduardo!
Eduardo, we are sorting out some tobacco for you.
Okay, great!
In the evening, I'll tell Pablo to come and get them.
Alright, Eduardo!
Okay, thank you.
Do you see how I'm blowing smoke?
Look!
From all sides.
That's what you're interested in, the hotel.
And there are good brands.
Yes, the part over here is white.
I have whitened it, see what it looks like now.
Alright, let's negotiate now.
Let's negotiate.
How much are you paying for that batch?
How much are you asking for?
What?
For 500, right?
They are already at four pesos each.
Oh my goodness!
Not for four twenty, not paying?
To make it quick, pay me four sixty and it's done.
With forty?
Alright, I'll give it to you for fifty and...
Okay.
My dream house has three bedrooms, two bathrooms, and the front part
should be all paved with a beautiful garden.
I love it, I love the garden.
And there should be a gate at the entrance.
A gate where, well, I don't know, maybe I'll put Villasol or Fincasol.
My name is Soledad, but everyone calls me Sol, so that would be my dream house.
Soledad.